\input texinfo      @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename rdebug-emacs.info

@set DBG ruby-debug
@set ttrdebug @code{rdebug}
@set ttDBG @code{@value{DBG}}
@set Emacs @sc{gnu} Emacs

@set RDEBUG_EMACS_VERSION 0.1
@include version-rdebug-emacs.texi
@finalout

@c Karl Berry informs me that this will add straight quotes in 
@c typewriter text.
@c See the "Inserting Quote Characters" node in the Texinfo manual
@set txicodequoteundirected
@set txicodequotebacktick

@c THIS MANUAL REQUIRES TEXINFO 4.0 OR LATER.

@c This is a dir.info fragment to support semi-automated addition of
@c manuals to an info tree.
@dircategory Programming & development tools.
@direntry
* ruby-debug-emacs: (ruby-debug).    Ruby Byebug for GNU Emacs
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Debugging with @code{ruby-debug} inside GNU Emacs Version @value{RDEBUG_EMACS_VERSION}
@sp 1
@subtitle @value{EDITION} Edition
@subtitle @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@author Rocky Bernstein and Anders Lindgren
@page
@ifset WHERETO
@tex
{\parskip=0pt
\hfill (Send bugs and comments on ruby-debug to fill in...)\par
\hfill {\it Debugging with {\tt ruby-debug}\par
\hfill \TeX{}info \texinfoversion\par
}
@end tex
@end ifset
@end titlepage
@page

@node Top, Getting started, (dir), (dir)
@top Debugging with ruby-debug under GNU Emacs

@menu
* Getting started::             
* The Multi-window Mode::       
* Byebug Buffers::            
* Emacs Byebug Commands::     Indexes (nodes containing large menus)
* Emacs Command Index::         An item for each GNU/Emacs command name.
* Emacs Function Index::        An item for each Emacs Function.
* Emacs Key Binding Index::     An item for each Emacs Byebug Command.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Getting started

* Installation::                How to install this package
* Emacs rdebug::                Invoke the ruby byebug initially
* Emacs shell tracking mode::   Entering rdebug from an existing shell buffer

Byebug Buffers

* Byebug Command Buffer::     
* Emacs Source::                Commands from the source script

Emacs Byebug Commands

* Emacs Byebug Common Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Breakpoint Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Stack Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Variable Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Watch Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs GUD Commands::          

@end detailmenu
@end menu

This file describes ruby-debug, the Ruby Byebug, 
version @value{RDEBUG_EMACS_VERSION}

This is the @value{EDITION} Edition, @value{UPDATED}
@c Copyright (C) 2007 ...

@c @node GNU Emacs
@c @chapter Using @code{ruby-debug} from GNU Emacs


@cindex @value{Emacs}
A special interface which comes with Ruby that allows you to use
@value{Emacs} to view (and edit) the source files for the program you
are debugging with @value{DBG}. However you must be using at least
version 21 of @value{Emacs}, but with @value{Emacs} version 22 or 23
there are even more debugging features available. @code{M-x
show-emacs-version} inside @value{Emacs} will tell you what version you
are running.

This package provide a full-fledged debugging environment, on par with
modern integrated development environments. Once the byebug has been
activated, the Emacs frame is divided into a number of dedicated
byebug windows.@footnote{If you are an @value{Emacs} traditionalist,
you can, of course, run this package with only a shell and source
buffer}

This package comes with a number of predefined window layouts. It is
fully customizable so you can create your own.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------


@node Getting started, The Multi-window Mode, Top, Top
@chapter Getting started

@menu
* Installation::                How to install this package
* Emacs rdebug::                Invoke the ruby byebug initially
* Emacs shell tracking mode::   Entering rdebug from an existing shell buffer
* Configurating this package::  Introducing the configure system
@end menu

@node Installation, Emacs rdebug, Getting started, Getting started
@section Installation

To use this interface, load the file @code{rdebug.el}. This file is a
light-weight file, basically it only contains a handful of
@code{autoload} directives.

For example, you can place the following in your @code{~/.emacs} file:

@smallexample
  (require 'rdebug)
@end smallexample

In addition, you must have Ruby and ruby-debug installed.


@node Emacs rdebug, Emacs shell tracking mode, Installation, Getting started
@section Emacs rdebug

Use the command @kbd{M-x rdebug} in @sc{gnu} Emacs to start debugging.
Give the executable file you want to debug as an argument. Make sure
to use the version that comes with this package as this is newer than
that supplied with @value{Emacs}.

The @kbd{rdebug} command starts @value{DBG} as a subprocess of Emacs,
with input and output through a newly created Emacs buffer.

Using @value{DBG} under Emacs is just like using @value{DBG}
normally except for two things:

@itemize @bullet
@item
All ``terminal'' input and output goes through the GNU Emacs buffer.
@end itemize

This applies both to @value{DBG} commands and their output, and to the input
and output done by the program you are debugging.

This is useful because it means that you can copy the text of previous
commands and input them again; you can even use parts of the output
in this way.

All the facilities of GNU Emacs' Shell mode are available for interacting
with your script.  In particular, you can send signals the usual
way---for example, @kbd{C-c C-c} for an interrupt, @kbd{C-c C-z} for a
stop.

@node Emacs shell tracking mode, Configurating this package, Emacs rdebug, Getting started
@section Entering rdebug from an existing shell buffer

Many times it's not feasible to enter the byebug from the outset.
Instead a call to the byebug is put inside the program.

@c See @xref{Unit Testing Session}.

It is also possible in GNU emacs to use a (``comint'') shell and set a
mode to watch for @value{DBG} prompts and track the source code in
another window. @xref{Interactive Shell, , Shell, Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.

To enable, this run @kbd{M-x turn-on-rdebug-track-mode}. There is some
overhead involved in scanning output, so if you are not debugging Ruby
programs you probably want to turn this off which can be done via the
@code{M-x turn-off-rdebugtrack} command.


@node Configurating this package,  , Emacs shell tracking mode, Getting started
@section Configurating this package

In this manual we present a number of @value{Emacs} lisp variables and
functions that you can use to configure the byebug interface. In
addition, you can use the @value{Emacs} @emph{customize} system, see the
@kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <options> <customize>} menu item.

@c -------------------------------------------------------------------

@node The Multi-window Mode, Byebug Buffers, Getting started, Top
@chapter Multi-window

In the multi-window byebug mode, a number of buffers are visible when
the byebug starts. This chapter will describe each of them, in
addition it will describe the features associated with the multi-window
mode.

The default multi-window layout looks like the following:

@verbatim
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                Toolbar                               |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                  |
| Byebug shell                    | Variables buffer                 |
|                                   |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                  |
| Source buffer                     | Output buffer                    |
|                                   |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                  |
| Stack buffer                      | Breakpoints buffer               |
|                                   |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
@end verbatim

@section Activating Multi-window mode

The variable @code{rdebug-many-windows} controls if multi-window mode
should be used, it is enabled by default. When starting the byebug
using the @code{M-x rdebug} mode the command line option @code{--emacs
3} must be specified (this is also the default).

When attaching to an already running byebug process, you must give the
byebug command @kbd{set annotate 3}.

@section Window Layouts

When the byebug is started, the original window layout of
@value{Emacs} is replaced with the window layout of the byebug. You
can switch back and forth between the original window layout and the
byebug layout using
@kbd{M-x rdebug-display-original-window-configuration} and
@kbd{M-x rdebug-display-byebug-window-configuration}.

If, for some reason, the byebug layout has been garbled you can
restore it to the original state using @kbd{M-x
rdebug-restore-byebug-window-layout}.

The byebug provides a number of different window layouts. The easies
way to try them out is to use the menu @kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug>
<layout>} and select any in the section starting with @code{Standard}.


@section The buffers

All buffers in this section share a set of commands for common byebug
operations and for switching between buffers. In addition, each buffer
has got a set of dedicated commands.

All byebug buffers, with the exception of source and the byebug
shell window, are called @emph{secondary buffers}.

@subsection Keybindings for all Byebug Windows

The byebug provides key-bindings that work in all byebug windows,
including Ruby source buffers. The key bindings are designed to match
keys of commonly used byebug environments.

The variable @code{rdebug-populate-common-keys-function} can be assigned
to a function that should bind the keys use. Three functions are
provided @code{rdebug-populate-common-keys-standard},
@code{...-eclipse}, and @code{...-netbeans}.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.2
@headitem Command               @tab Standard @tab Eclipse @tab Netbeans
@item Run                       @tab f5       @tab         @tab
@item Quit                      @tab S-f5     @tab         @tab
@item Toggle Breakpoint         @tab f9       @tab         @tab
@item Enable/Disable Breakpoint @tab C-f9     @tab S-C-b   @tab S-f8
@item Step over                 @tab f10      @tab f6      @tab f8
@item Step into                 @tab f11      @tab f5      @tab f7
@item Step out                  @tab S-f11    @tab f7      @tab M-S-f7

@end multitable



@subsection Keybindings for Secondary Buffers

The following commands are available in all secondary windows.

Capital letters move between secondary buffers as mentioned above (jump
to if visible or replace a secondary if not).

@table @kbd
@item SPACE
step (edebug compatible)
@item <
Up in the stack trace
@item >
Down in the stack trace
@item ?
Help
@item B
Display breakpoints buffer
@item C
Display command buffer
@item O
Display program output
@item S
Display source window
@item T
Display stack trace buffer
@item V
display variables buffer
@item W
display watch buffer
@item b
Set breakpoint
@item c
Continue (i.e. run)
@item d
Remove breakpoint
@item f
Finish (i.e. step out of the current function)
@item n
Next (i.e. step into function)
@item p
print
@item q
Quit
@item r
Restart
@item s
Step (i.e. step over function)
@end table

You can use the same commands in the source buffer if you enable
@code{rdebug-short-key-mode}. The best way to do this is to add the
following to your init file:

@smallexample
  (add-hook 'rdebug-mode-hook 'rdebug-turn-on-short-key-mode)
@end smallexample



@subsection The Byebug Shell Buffer

The @emph{byebug shell window} is the main communication channel
between @value{DBG} and @value{Emacs}. You can use the shell to issue
byebug commands directly. In addition, any @value{Emacs} byebug
command you issue will be translated into shell commands, and the output
will be parsed.

It is the ambition that the @value{Emacs} byebug interface should be
in a state where the byebug shell window would not need to be visible.

@subsection The Source Buffer

The @emph{source buffers} (or buffers) contains the actual Ruby source
code that is being debugged. A small arrow in the left fringe displays
the current line. Active breakpoints are displayed as red dots and
passive as grey.

@subsection The Output Buffer

The @emph{output buffer} displays any output the debugged program emits.

The option @code{rdebug-use-separate-io-buffer} controls if the output
buffer should be used, or if the output would go into the byebug shell
buffer.

@subsection The Variables Buffer

In this buffer, local and object variables are displayed. The values of
the variables can be edited.

@table @kbd
@item RET
Edit the value
@item e
Print the value
@item x
Pretty-print the value
@end table

@subsection The Stack Trace Buffer

The @emph{stack trace} buffer displays the function that is currently
being byebug, the function that called it, etc., all the way up to the
originally called function.

You can navigate in the stack trace buffer in order to see the source of
any function in the call chain. The Variables buffer will also be
updated to reflect the local variables of that function.

@table @kbd
@item RET
Select a function to display
@item <digits>
Go to a stack frame
@end table

@subsection The Watch Buffer

The @emph{Watch Buffer} can display arbitrary expressions, including,
but not limited to, global variables.

@table @kbd
@item a
Add a watch expression
@item C-d, d
Delete a watch expression
@item RET, e
Edit a watch expression
@item <digits>
Go to the expression
@end table

@subsection The Breakpoints Buffer

The @emph{Breakpoints Buffer} displays all breakpoints that currently are
defined and shows if they are enabled or disabled.

@table @kbd
@item t
Toggle a breakpoint between enabled and disabled
@item i
Add a breakpoint condition
@item ret
Goto a breakpoint
@item C-d
Delete a breakpoint
@item <digits>
Go to the expression
@end table

@subsection The Help Buffer

The @emph{Help Buffer} is displayed whenever you press @code{?}. It will
display a help text on the available byebug commands and commands to
navigate between the buffers.


@c -------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Byebug Buffers, Emacs Byebug Commands, The Multi-window Mode, Top
@chapter Byebug Buffers

@menu
* Byebug Command Buffer::     
* Emacs Source::                Commands from the source script
@end menu

@node Byebug Command Buffer, Emacs Source, Byebug Buffers, Byebug Buffers
@section Emacs Byebug Command buffer

Each time @value{DBG} displays a stack frame, Emacs automatically finds the
source file for that frame and puts an arrow (@samp{=>}) at the
left margin of the current line.  Emacs uses a separate buffer for
source display, and splits the screen to show both your @value{DBG} session
and the source.

Explicit @value{DBG} @code{list} or search commands still produce output as
usual, but you probably have no reason to use them from GNU Emacs.

@quotation
@emph{Warning:} If the directory where your script resides is not your
current directory, it can be easy to confuse Emacs about the location of
the source files, in which case the auxiliary display buffer does not
appear to show your source.  @value{DBG} can find programs by searching your
environment's @code{PATH} variable, so the @value{DBG} input and output
session proceeds normally; but Emacs does not get enough information
back from @value{DBG} to locate the source files in this situation.  To
avoid this problem, either start @value{DBG} mode from the directory where
your script resides, or specify an absolute file name when prompted for the
@kbd{M-x gdb} argument.

A similar confusion can result if you use the @value{DBG} @code{file} command to
switch to debugging a program in some other location, from an existing
@value{DBG} buffer in Emacs.
@end quotation

@noindent
(preceded by @kbd{M-:} or @kbd{ESC :}, or typed in the @code{*scratch*} buffer, or
in your @file{.emacs} file).

In the @value{DBG} I/O buffer, you can use the Emacs commands listed
below in addition to the standard Shell mode commands. The I/O buffer
name name is usually @code{*gud-}@emph{script-name}@code{*}, where
@emph{script-name} is the name of the script you are debugging.

Many of the commands listed below are also bound to a second key
sequence which also can be used in the also be used in the source
script. These are listed in @ref{Emacs Source}.

In secondary buffers many commands are available the corresponding
final keystroke. For example @code{C-c n} in a secondary buffer is
@code{n}.

@table @kbd
@item C-h m
Describe the features of Emacs' @value{DBG} Mode.

@item C-x C-a C-b (gud-break)
@pindex C-x C-a C-b (gud-break)
Set breakpoint at current line.

@item C-x C-a C-d (gud-remove)
@pindex C-x C-a C-d (gud-remove)
Remove breakpoint at current line.

@item C-x C-a C-l (gud-refresh)
@pindex C-x C-a C-d (gud-refresh)
Fix up a possibly garbled display, and redraw the arrow.

@item C-c RET (comint-copy-old-input)
@pindex C-c RET (comint-copy-old-input)
Insert after prompt old input at point as new input to be edited.
Calls `comint-get-old-input' to get old input.

@item C-c n (gud-next)
@pindex C-c n (gud-next)
Step one line, skipping functions. (Step over).

@item C-x C-a C-o (comint-delete-output)
@pindex C-c n (comint-delete-output)
Delete all output from interpreter since last input. Does not delete
the prompt.

@item C-x C-a C-r (gud-cont)

@item C-c SPC (gud-step @var{arg})
@pindex C-c SPC (gud-step @var{arg})
@itemx C-x C-a C-s (gud-step @var{arg})
@pindex C-x C-a C-s (gud-step @var{arg})
Step one source line. Same as @value{DBG} @code{step} command. The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-step} and @code{C-x C-a C-s}
is an alternate binding which can be used in the source
script. 
@c @xref{Step}.

With a numeric argument, run that many times.
@xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.


@item C-x C-a C-t (gud-tbreak @var{arg})
Set temporary breakpoint at current line.

@item C-x C-a C-w (backward-kill-word)
@item C-x C-a C-x (comint-get-next-from-history)
@item C-x C-a C-z (comint-stop-subjob)
Stop the current subjob.
This command also kills the pending input
between the process mark and point.

WARNING: if there is no current subjob, you can end up suspending
the top-level process running in the buffer.  If you accidentally do
this, use M-x comint-continue-subjob to resume the process.  (This
is not a problem with most shells, since they ignore this signal.)

@item C-x C-a C-\ (comint-quit-subjob)
Send quit signal to the current subjob.
This command also kills the pending input
between the process mark and point.

@item C-c +   (gud-step-plus)
Run @code{step+}.

@item C-c .   (comint-insert-previous-argument @var{index})
Insert the @emph{index-th} argument from the previous Comint command-line at point.
Spaces are added at beginning and/or end of the inserted string if
necessary to ensure that it's separated from adjacent arguments.
Interactively, if no prefix argument is given, the last argument is inserted.
Repeated interactive invocations will cycle through the same argument
from progressively earlier commands (using the value of index specified
with the first command).

@item C-c < (gud-up) 
Go up a stack frame. With a numeric argument, go up that many
stack frames. Same @value{DBG} @code{up} command.
@xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.

@item C-c >	(gud-down)
Go down a stack frame.  Same as @value{DBG} @code{down}.
With a numeric argument, go down that many stack frames.
@xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.

@item C-c ?	(rdebug-display-secondary-window-help-buffer)
Display the rdebug help buffer.

@item C-c B	(rdebug-display-breakpoints-buffer)
Display the rdebug breakpoints buffer.

@item C-x C-a C	(rdebug-display-cmd-buffer)
Display the rdebug command buffer.

@item C-c O	(rdebug-display-output-buffer)
Display the rdebug output buffer.

@item C-c R	(gud-run)
@itemx C-c r	(gud run)
Restart or run the script. Same as @value{DBG} @code{run} command.

@item C-c S	(gud-source-resync)
@item C-c T	(rdebug-display-stack-buffer)
Display the rdebug stack buffer.
@item C-c V	(rdebug-display-variables-buffer)
Display the rdebug variables buffer.

@item C-c W	(rdebug-display-watch-buffer)
Display the rdebug watch buffer.

@item C-c f	(gud-finish @var{arg})
@pindex C-c f	(gud-finish @var{arg})
Finish executing current function.

@itemx C-x C-a C-f (gud-finish)
@pindex C-x C-a C-f (gud-finish)
Finish executing current function. The same as @value{DBG}
@code{finish} command. 
@c @xref{Finish}.

@item C-c n	(gud-next)
@pindex C-c n	(gud-next)
Execute to next source line in this function, skipping all function
calls. Same as @value{DBG} @code{next} command.  
@c @xref{Next}.

With a numeric argument, run that many times.
@c @xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs} Manual}.

@item C-c q	(gud-quit)

@item C-x C-a C-l
Resynchronize the current position with the source window. The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-refresh} and @code{C-x C-a
C-l} is an alternate binding which also can be used in the source script.

@item C-c a
Shows argument variables (e.g.@: @code{$1}, @code{$2}) of the current
stack frame. Same as @value{DBG} @code{info args} command. The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-args} and @code{C-x C-a a} is
an alternate binding which also can be used in the source script.

@item C-c T
Show stack trace. Same as @value{DBG} @code{where} command. The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-where} and @code{C-x C-a T} is
an alternate binding which can be used in the source
script. 
@c @xref{Backtrace}.

@end table

In any source file, the Emacs command @kbd{C-x SPC} (@code{gud-break})
tells @value{DBG} to set a breakpoint on the source line point is on.

If you accidentally delete the source-display buffer, an easy way to get
it back is to type the command @code{frame} in the @value{DBG} buffer, to
request a frame display; when you run under Emacs, this recreates
the source buffer if necessary to show you the context of the current
frame.

The source files displayed in Emacs are in ordinary Emacs buffers
which are visiting the source files in the usual way.  You can edit
the files with these buffers if you wish; but keep in mind that @value{DBG}
communicates with Emacs in terms of line numbers.  If you add or
delete lines from the text, the line numbers that @value{DBG} knows cease
to correspond properly with the code.

@xref{Byebug Operation, , , Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.

@node Emacs Source,  , Byebug Command Buffer, Byebug Buffers
@section Commands from the source script

@table @kbd
@item C-x SPC

tells @value{DBG} to set a breakpoint on the source
line point is on. (@code{gud-break}) 

@item C-x C-a t	

@code{gud-linetrace}

@item C-x C-a C-f
Restart or run the script. Same as @value{DBG} @code{run} command. The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-finish}. In the corresponding
I/O buffer, @code{C-c R} is an alternate binding.

@item C-x C-a T	
Show stack trace. Same as @value{DBG} @code{where} command. In the
corresponding I/O buffer, @code{C-c T} is an alternate
binding. 
@c @xref{Backtrace}.

@item C-x C-a <	

Go up a stack frame. With a numeric argument, go up that many
stack frames. Same @value{DBG} @code{up} command.
@xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs} Manual}.

The @value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-up}. In the corresponding
I/O buffer, @code{C-c <} is an alternate binding.

@item C-x C-a >	

Go down a stack frame.  Same as @value{DBG} @code{down}.
With a numeric argument, go down that many stack frames.
@xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.

The @value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-down}. In the
corresponding I/O buffer, @code{C-c >} is an alternate binding.

@item C-x C-a C-t

@code{gud-tbreak}

@item C-x C-a C-s

Step one source line. Same as @value{DBG} @code{step}
command. 
@c @xref{Step}.

With a numeric argument, run that many times.
@xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments, Emacs, The @value{Emacs}
Manual}.

The @value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-step}. In the
corresponding I/O buffer, @code{C-x C-a C-s} is an alternate binding.

@item C-x C-a C-e

@code{gud-statement}

@item C-x C-a R	
Restart or run the script. Same as @value{DBG} @code{run} command. The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-run}. In the corresponding I/O
buffer, @code{C-c R} is an alternate binding.

@item C-x C-a C-d
Delete breakpoint. @code{gud-remove}

@item C-x C-a C-p

@code{gud-print}

@item C-x C-a C-n

Execute to next source line in this function, skipping all function
calls. Same as @value{DBG} @code{next} command.  With a numeric
argument, run that many times.  @xref{Arguments, , Numeric Arguments,
Emacs, The @value{Emacs} Manual}.

The @value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-next}. In the
corresponding I/O buffer, @code{C-x C-a C-n} is an alternate binding.

@item C-x C-a f	C-f

@code{gud-finish}

@item C-x C-a C-r
Continue execution of your script Same as @value{DBG} @code{continue}
command. The @value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-cont}. In the
corresponding I/O buffer, @code{C-x C-a C-r} is an alternate binding. 
@c See @ref{Continue}.

@item C-x C-a C-b

@code{gud-break}

@item C-x C-a a	

@code{gud-args}
Shows argument variables (e.g.@: @code{$1}, @code{$2}) of the current
stack frame. Same as @value{DBG} @code{info args} command.  The
@value{Emacs} command name is @code{gud-args}. In the corresponding
I/O buffer, @code{C-c a} is an alternate binding which also can be
used in the source script.

@item C-x C-a C-l
Move to current position in this source window. The @value{Emacs}
command name is @code{gud-refresh}. In the corresponding I/O buffer,
@code{C-x C-a C-l} is an alternate binding.

@end table

@node Emacs Byebug Commands, Emacs Command Index, Byebug Buffers, Top
@chapter Emacs Byebug Commands

@menu
* Emacs Byebug Common Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Breakpoint Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Stack Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Variable Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs Byebug Watch Buffer Commands::  
* Emacs GUD Commands::          
@end menu

@node Emacs Byebug Common Commands, Emacs Byebug Breakpoint Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands
@section Emacs Byebug Common Commands

The commands in this section are used to make a secondary buffer
visible. If the buffer doesn't exist, nothing is done.
The way the buffer is made visible is follows the following
rules tried in order:

@enumerate
@item
If the buffer doesn't exist, do nothing. 
@item 
If the buffer is already displayed, switch to it. 
@item 
If the current buffer is a
secondary buffer, bury it replacing with the requested
buffer. 
@item 
If there is secondary buffer visible, that
is replaced instead.  
@item 
Just pick a visible buffer to bury and replace.
                            @end enumerate

The commands are also have key bindings that end in an uppercase
letter. This letter is given in parenthesis. When in one of the
secondary buffers, the uppercase letter is bound to the command as well.

@table @kbd

@item (rdebug-display-breakpoints-buffer) (@kbd{B})
@findex rdebug-display-breakpoints-buffer (@kbd{B})
Display the rdebug breakpoints buffer.  Bound to: @kbd{C-x C-a B},
@kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <view> <breakpoints>}. Secondary buffers:
@kbd{O}.

@item (rdebug-display-cmd-buffer) (@kbd{C})
@findex rdebug-display-cmd-buffer (@kbd{C})
Display the byebug command buffer.

Bound to: @kbd{C-x C-a C}, @kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <view> <shell>}.

@item (rdebug-display-output-buffer) (@kbd{O})
@findex rdebug-display-output-buffer (@kbd{?})
Display the byebug output buffer.

Bound to: @kbd{C-x C-a O}, @kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <view>
<output>}. Secondary buffers: @kbd{O}.

@item (rdebug-display-secondary-window-help-buffer) (@kbd{?})
@findex rdebug-display-secondary-window-help-buffer (@kbd{?})

@item (rdebug-display-stack-buffer) (@kbd{T})
@findex rdebug-display-stack-buffer (@kbd{T})
Display the byebug stack buffer. Bound to: @kbd{C-x C-a T},
@kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <view> <stack>}. Secondary buffers: @kbd{T}.

@item (rdebug-display-variables-buffer) (@kbd{V})
@findex rdebug-display-variables-buffer (@kbd{V})
Display the byebug variables buffer. Bound to: @kbd{C-x C-a V},
@kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <view> <variables>}.  Secondary buffers:
@kbd{V}.

@item (rdebug-display-watch-buffer) (@kbd{W})
@findex rdebug-display-watch-buffer (@kbd{W})
Display the byebug variables buffer. Bound to: @kbd{C-x C-a W},
@kbd{<menu-bar> <byebug> <view> <watch>}. Secondary buffers: @kbd{V}.

@item (rdebug-display-byebug-window-configuration)
@findex rdebug-display-byebug-window-configuration
Display the current layout of windows of the rdebug Ruby byebug.
@item (rdebug-display-original-window-configuration)
@findex rdebug-display-original-window-configuration
Display the layout of windows prior to starting the rdebug Ruby
byebug.  This function is called upon quitting the byebug and
@var{rdebug-many-windows} is not nil.
@item (rdebug-goto-entry-n)
@findex rdebug-goto-entry-n
Breakpoints, Display expressions and Stack Frames all have
numbers associated with them which are distinct from line
numbers. In a secondary buffer, this function is usually bound to
a numeric key. which will position you at that entry number. To
go to an entry above 9, just keep entering the number. For
example, if you press 1 and then 9, you should jump to entry
1 (if it exists) and then 19 (if that exists). Entering any
non-digit will start entry number from the beginning again.
@item (rdebug-quit) - q
@findex rdebug-quit (q)
Kill the byebug process associated with the buffer.

When @var{rdebug-many-windows} is active, the original window layout is
restored.
@item (rdebug-restore-windows)
@findex rdebug-restore-windows
Display the initial ruby byebug window layout.

@end table


@node Emacs Byebug Breakpoint Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Stack Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Common Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands
@section Emacs Byebug Breakpoint Buffer Commands

@table @kbd
@item (rdebug-goto-breakpoint)
@findex rdebug-goto-breakpoint
@item (rdebug-goto-breakpoint-mouse)
@findex rdebug-goto-breakpoint-mouse
@item (rdebug-breakpoints-mode)
@findex rdebug-breakpoints-mode
Major mode for displaying breakpoints in a secondary window. Uses
@var{rdebug-breakpoints-mode-map}.
@end table

@node Emacs Byebug Stack Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Variable Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Breakpoint Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands
@section Emacs Byebug Stack Buffer Commands

@table @kbd
@item (rdebug-goto-stack-frame)
@findex rdebug-goto-stack-frame
@item (rdebug-frames-mode)
@findex rdebug-frames-mode
Major mode for displaying the stack trace. Uses
@var{rdebug-frames-mode-map}.
@end table

@node Emacs Byebug Variable Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Watch Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Stack Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands
@section Emacs Byebug Variable Buffer Commands

@table @kbd
@item (rdebug-variables-edit)
@findex rdebug-variables-edit
@end table

@node Emacs Byebug Watch Buffer Commands, Emacs GUD Commands, Emacs Byebug Variable Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands
@section Emacs Byebug Watch Buffer Commands

@table @kbd
@item (rdebug-watch-add)
@findex rdebug-watch-add
Add a display expression.
@item (rdebug-watch-delete)
@findex rdebug-watch-delete
Delete a display expression.
@item (rdebug-watch-edit)
@findex rdebug-watch-edit
Edit a display expression.
@item (rdebug-watch-mode)
@findex rdebug-watch-mode
Major mode for displaying the display expressions. Uses
@var{rdebug-watch-mode-map}.
@end table

@node Emacs GUD Commands,  , Emacs Byebug Watch Buffer Commands, Emacs Byebug Commands
@section Emacs Byebug GUD Commands

@table @kbd
@item (comint-copy-old-input)
@findex comint-copy-old-input
Insert after prompt old input at point as new input to be edited.
Calls `comint-get-old-input' to get old input.
@item (comint-delete-output)
@findex comint-delete-output
Delete all output from interpreter since last input.
Does not delete the prompt.
@item (gud-break)
@findex gud-break
Set a breakpoint on the source line point is on.
@item (gud-cont) - c
@findex gud-cont (c)
Continue execution. 
@item (gud-next) - n
@findex gud-next (n)
Step one line, skipping functions. (Step over).
@item (gud-refresh)
@findex gud-refresh
Fix up a possibly garbled display, and redraw the arrow.
@item (gud-remove)
@findex gud-remove
Remove breakpoint at current line.
@item (gud-step) - s
@findex gud-step (s)
Step one statement. (Step into)
@item (gud-step-plus) - + 
@findex gud-step-plus (+)
Run @code{step+}---like @code{gud-step} but ensure we go to a new
line.
@item (gud-tbreak @var{arg})
@findex gud-tbreak
Set temporary breakpoint at current line.
@end table

@node Emacs Command Index, Emacs Function Index, Emacs Byebug Commands, Top
@unnumbered Emacs Command Index
@printindex pg

@node Emacs Function Index, Emacs Key Binding Index, Emacs Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Emacs Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Emacs Key Binding Index,  , Emacs Function Index, Top
@unnumbered Key Binding Index
@printindex ky

@tex
% I think something like @colophon should be in texinfo.  In the
% meantime:
\long\def\colophon{\hbox to0pt{}\vfill
\centerline{The body of this manual is set in}
\centerline{\fontname\tenrm,}
\centerline{with headings in {\bf\fontname\tenbf}}
\centerline{and examples in {\tt\fontname\tentt}.}
\centerline{{\it\fontname\tenit\/},}
\centerline{{\bf\fontname\tenbf}, and}
\centerline{{\sl\fontname\tensl\/}}
\centerline{are used for emphasis.}\vfill}
\page\colophon
% Blame: doc@cygnus.com, 1991.
@end tex

@bye
